README.md, before:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# naijR

An R package on Nigeria and for Nigeria

<!-- badges: start -->

[![CRAN
status](https://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/naijR)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=naijR)
[![Travis build
status](https://travis-ci.org/BroVic/naijR.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/BroVic/naijR)
[![Codecov test
coverage](https://codecov.io/gh/BroVic/naijR/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/BroVic/naijR?branch=master)
<!-- badges: end -->

The goal of **naijR** is to make it easier for R users to work with data
related to Nigeria.

## Usage

### Prerequisites

This is a package for use in the R ecosystem. To install R, visit
<https://cran.r-project.org>.

### Installation

To download and install the current stable version of this package from
CRAN:

``` r
install.packages("naijR")
```

The development version can be obtained from
[GitHub](https://github.com/BroVic/naijR) with:

``` r
# If necessary, 'install.packages("remotes")' first
remotes::install_github("BroVic/naijR")
```

### Some simple operations

#### Maps

A major feature of this version of the packages is the introduction of
various map drawing capabilities. To read more about this, read the
vignette with this

``` r
vignette('nigeria-maps', 'naijR')
#> Warning: vignette 'nigeria-maps' not found
```

#### States

To create a list of all the States of the Nigerian Federation, simply
call `states()`

``` r
library(naijR, quietly = TRUE)
states()
#>  [1] "Abia"                      "Adamawa"                  
#>  [3] "Akwa Ibom"                 "Anambra"                  
#>  [5] "Bauchi"                    "Bayelsa"                  
#>  [7] "Benue"                     "Borno"                    
#>  [9] "Cross River"               "Delta"                    
#> [11] "Ebonyi"                    "Edo"                      
#> [13] "Ekiti"                     "Enugu"                    
#> [15] "Federal Capital Territory" "Gombe"                    
#> [17] "Imo"                       "Jigawa"                   
#> [19] "Kaduna"                    "Kano"                     
#> [21] "Katsina"                   "Kebbi"                    
#> [23] "Kogi"                      "Kwara"                    
#> [25] "Lagos"                     "Nasarawa"                 
#> [27] "Niger"                     "Ogun"                     
#> [29] "Ondo"                      "Osun"                     
#> [31] "Oyo"                       "Plateau"                  
#> [33] "Rivers"                    "Sokoto"                   
#> [35] "Taraba"                    "Yobe"                     
#> [37] "Zamfara"
```

States from a given geo-political zone can also be selected

``` r
states(gpz = "ne")  # i.e. North-East
#> [1] "Adamawa" "Bauchi"  "Borno"   "Gombe"   "Taraba"  "Yobe"
```

For other capabilities of this function, see `?states()`

#### Local Government Areas

This is a basic example that shows how to very quickly fetch the names
of Local Government Areas within a given State:

``` r
lgas_ng("Imo")
#>  [1] "Aboh Mbaise"      "Ahiazu Mbaise"    "Ehime Mbano"      "Ezinihitte"      
#>  [5] "Ideato North"     "Ideato South"     "Ihitte/Uboma"     "Ikeduru"         
#>  [9] "Isiala Mbano"     "Isu"              "Mbaitoli"         "Ngor Okpala"     
#> [13] "Njaba"            "Nkwerre"          "Nwangele"         "Obowo"           
#> [17] "Oguta"            "Ohaji/Egbema"     "Okigwe"           "Orlu"            
#> [21] "Orsu"             "Oru East"         "Oru West"         "Owerri Municipal"
#> [25] "Owerri North"     "Owerri West"      "Unuimo"
```

To list all the LGAs in Nigeria, call the same function without any
parameters:

``` r
n <- length(lgas_ng())
sprintf("Nigeria has a total of %i Local Government Areas", n)
#> [1] "Nigeria has a total of 774 Local Government Areas"
```

Want to create a function to check how many LGAs a particular State has?

``` r
how_many_lgas <- function(state) {
  require(naijR)
  stopifnot(state %in% states())
  cat(sprintf("No. of LGAs in %s State:", state),
      length(lgas_ng(state)),
      fill = TRUE)
}

how_many_lgas("Sokoto")
#> No. of LGAs in Sokoto State: 23
how_many_lgas("Ekiti")
#> No. of LGAs in Ekiti State: 16
```

#### Working with phone numbers

It is common to come across datasets where phone numbers are wrongly
entered or misinterpreted by regular software like MS Excel. The
function `fix_mobile()` helps with this.

``` r
fix_mobile("8032000000")
#> [1] "08032000000"
```

The function works on vectors; thus an entire column of a table with
phone numbers can be quickly processed. Illegible or irreparable numbers
are turned into missing values, e.g.

``` r
(dat <- data.frame(
  serialno = 1:8,
  phone = c(
    "123456789",
    "0123456789",
    "8000000001",
    "9012345678",
    "07098765432",
    "08123456789",
    "09064321987",
    "O8055577889"
  )
))
#>   serialno       phone
#> 1        1   123456789
#> 2        2  0123456789
#> 3        3  8000000001
#> 4        4  9012345678
#> 5        5 07098765432
#> 6        6 08123456789
#> 7        7 09064321987
#> 8        8 O8055577889
```

``` r
fix_mobile(dat$phone)
#> [1] NA            NA            "08000000001" "09012345678" "07098765432"
#> [6] "08123456789" "09064321987" NA
```

## Future Work

Some features to expect in the next minor update:

  - Manipulation of phone numbers will provide options for the
    introduction of separators. Also the function will become more
    intelligent, pre-empting errors in data entry e.g. accepting the
    letter ‘O’ as a presumed zero (`0`).
  - `fix_mobile()` currently works with character vectors. It will be
    allowed to work with numeric vectors, converting these to character
    vectors internally.
  - Misspelling of Local Government Areas is very common and it is
    common to find so many variants, especially where compound names are
    involved. Functionality to address this problem will be introduced.
  - A distance matrix for major locations in the country.

## Feedback/Contribution

This is an open source project and contributions are welcome. Pull
requests for R code or documentation, and any suggestions for making
this effort worthwhile will be gladly entertained.

For bug reports or feature requests, kindly submit an
[issue](https://github.com/BroVic/naijR/issues/new).

Commit message:

Do not evaluate `vignette` code snippet
Also simply some of the code samples

README.md, after:


<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

# naijR

An R package on Nigeria and for Nigeria

<!-- badges: start -->

[![CRAN
status](https://www.r-pkg.org/badges/version/naijR)](https://cran.r-project.org/package=naijR)
[![Travis build
status](https://travis-ci.org/BroVic/naijR.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/BroVic/naijR)
[![Codecov test
coverage](https://codecov.io/gh/BroVic/naijR/branch/master/graph/badge.svg)](https://codecov.io/gh/BroVic/naijR?branch=master)
<!-- badges: end -->

The goal of **naijR** is to make it easier for R users to work with data
related to Nigeria.

## Usage

### Prerequisites

This is a package for use in the R ecosystem. To install R, visit
<https://cran.r-project.org>.

### Installation

To download and install the current stable version of this package from
CRAN:

``` r
install.packages("naijR")
```

The development version can be obtained from
[GitHub](https://github.com/BroVic/naijR) with:

``` r
# If necessary, 'install.packages("remotes")' first
remotes::install_github("BroVic/naijR")
```

### Some simple operations

#### Maps

A major feature of this version of the packages is the introduction of
various map drawing capabilities. To read more about this, read the
vignette with this

``` r
vignette('nigeria-maps', 'naijR')
```

#### States

To create a list of all the States of the Nigerian Federation, simply
call `states()`

``` r
library(naijR, quietly = TRUE)
states()
#>  [1] "Abia"                      "Adamawa"                  
#>  [3] "Akwa Ibom"                 "Anambra"                  
#>  [5] "Bauchi"                    "Bayelsa"                  
#>  [7] "Benue"                     "Borno"                    
#>  [9] "Cross River"               "Delta"                    
#> [11] "Ebonyi"                    "Edo"                      
#> [13] "Ekiti"                     "Enugu"                    
#> [15] "Federal Capital Territory" "Gombe"                    
#> [17] "Imo"                       "Jigawa"                   
#> [19] "Kaduna"                    "Kano"                     
#> [21] "Katsina"                   "Kebbi"                    
#> [23] "Kogi"                      "Kwara"                    
#> [25] "Lagos"                     "Nasarawa"                 
#> [27] "Niger"                     "Ogun"                     
#> [29] "Ondo"                      "Osun"                     
#> [31] "Oyo"                       "Plateau"                  
#> [33] "Rivers"                    "Sokoto"                   
#> [35] "Taraba"                    "Yobe"                     
#> [37] "Zamfara"
```

States from a given geo-political zone can also be selected

``` r
states(gpz = "ne")  # i.e. North-East
#> [1] "Adamawa" "Bauchi"  "Borno"   "Gombe"   "Taraba"  "Yobe"
```

For other capabilities of this function, see `?states()`

#### Local Government Areas

This is a basic example that shows how to very quickly fetch the names
of Local Government Areas within a given State:

``` r
lgas_ng("Imo")
#>  [1] "Aboh Mbaise"      "Ahiazu Mbaise"    "Ehime Mbano"      "Ezinihitte"      
#>  [5] "Ideato North"     "Ideato South"     "Ihitte/Uboma"     "Ikeduru"         
#>  [9] "Isiala Mbano"     "Isu"              "Mbaitoli"         "Ngor Okpala"     
#> [13] "Njaba"            "Nkwerre"          "Nwangele"         "Obowo"           
#> [17] "Oguta"            "Ohaji/Egbema"     "Okigwe"           "Orlu"            
#> [21] "Orsu"             "Oru East"         "Oru West"         "Owerri Municipal"
#> [25] "Owerri North"     "Owerri West"      "Unuimo"
```

To list all the LGAs in Nigeria, call the same function without any
parameters:

``` r
n <- length(lgas_ng())
sprintf("Nigeria has a total of %i Local Government Areas", n)
#> [1] "Nigeria has a total of 774 Local Government Areas"
```

Want to create a function to check how many LGAs a particular State has?

``` r
how_many_lgas <- function(state) {
  n <- length(naijR::lgas_ng(state))
  cat(state, "State has", n, "LGAs\n")
}

how_many_lgas("Sokoto")
#> Sokoto State has 23 LGAs
how_many_lgas("Ekiti")
#> Ekiti State has 16 LGAs
```

#### Working with phone numbers

It is common to come across datasets where phone numbers are wrongly
entered or misinterpreted by software like MS Excel. The function
`fix_mobile()` helps with this.

``` r
fix_mobile("8032000000")
#> [1] "08032000000"
```

The function works on vectors; thus an entire column of a table with
phone numbers can be quickly processed. Illegible or irreparable numbers
are turned into missing values, e.g.

``` r
(dat <- data.frame(
  serialno = 1:8,
  phone = c(
    "123456789",
    "0123456789",
    "8000000001",
    "9012345678",
    "07098765432",
    "08123456789",
    "09064321987",
    "O8055577889"
  )
))
#>   serialno       phone
#> 1        1   123456789
#> 2        2  0123456789
#> 3        3  8000000001
#> 4        4  9012345678
#> 5        5 07098765432
#> 6        6 08123456789
#> 7        7 09064321987
#> 8        8 O8055577889
```

``` r
fix_mobile(dat$phone)
#> [1] NA            NA            "08000000001" "09012345678" "07098765432"
#> [6] "08123456789" "09064321987" NA
```

## Future Work

Some enhancements to expect in future updates:

  - Manipulation of phone numbers will provide options for the
    introduction of separators. Also the function will become more
    intelligent, pre-empting errors in data entry e.g. accepting the
    letter ‘O’ as a presumed zero (`0`).
  - `fix_mobile()` currently works with character vectors. It will be
    allowed to work with numeric vectors, converting these to character
    vectors internally.
  - Misspelling of Local Government Areas is very common and it is
    common to find so many variants, especially where compound names are
    involved. Functionality to address this problem will be introduced.
  - A distance matrix for major locations in the country.

## Feedback/Contribution

This is an open source project and contributions are welcome. Pull
requests for R code or documentation, and any suggestions for making
this effort worthwhile will be gladly entertained.

For bug reports or feature requests, kindly submit an
[issue](https://github.com/BroVic/naijR/issues/new).
